1. Informative Missing Outcome

If an outcome is "missing not at random" (mnar), that means that its probability of missingness depends on its value. If this is the case, it is necessary to model the missingness mechanism. This model cannot be learned empirically since by definition of "missing" we never observe the outcome value when it is missing. 

 

As an example, suppose a lab rat's weight was measured on five occasions, but the measurement at the last occasion is missing. So the data look like:

y = (177, 236, 285, 350, NA)

x= (8, 15, 22, 29, 36)

where y is the weight and x is the day of each measurement.

Further, suppose that we believe the probability of missingness at the last occasion depends on the (unobserved) weight at that occasion through the following logistic regression model:

logit ( p ( m i s s i n g i | y i ) ) = a + b ( y i − 250 )  

where b is assumed known to be log(1.02) and we place a N(0,1) prior on a.

(a) Fit a standard linear linear model of y on x including the missingness model for y.

(b) Fit the same linear model of y on x using alternative models for the missingness of y and assess the sensitivity of your results to the choice of missingness model.



2. Log-linear Poisson Regression

Some investigators (J. Brockmann, Ethology 1996) collected data on horseshoe crabs (see the file crab.txt). Each crab in the study is a female, and the aim of the study was to explore factors related to how many male crabs in addition to a female's mate reside in close proximity to the female. These additional males are called "satellites", and the number of satellites for each female crab can be found in the column Sa. The potential explanatory variables are width (W), spine condition (S), and weight (Wt). The column names of the table are given by 

c("Obs","C","S","W","Wt","Sa")

Suppose the number of satellites for the ith female crab follows a poisson distribution with parameter LaTeX: \lambda_i λ i  and that LaTeX: \log\left(\lambda_i\right) log ⁡ ( λ i )  is a linear function of width. If you observe two crabs, one of which is 1 unit wider than the other, what is the posterior mean of the ratio of the expected number of satellites of the wider crab to the expected number of satellites of the thinner crab according to this model? Produce plots of the posterior predictive distributions of number of satellites for the .25, .5, and .75 quantiles of width in the study.

